add ADR for env triad (#881)
microbiomedata/issues: decisions/0015-env-triad-terms.md

  with the exception of host-associated samples, including plant-associated samples.
- `env_local_scale` will consist of subclasses
  of [material entity [BFO:0000040]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FBFO_0000040?lang=en),
  minus biome [ENVO:00000428]
  and [environmental material [ENVO:00010483]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00010483)
    - It's expected that additional branches of the is_a hierarchy will subtracted,
      like [chemical entity [CHEBI:24431]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FCHEBI_24431)
- `env_medium` will consist of subclasses environmental material [ENVO:00010483]

For **soil** environment (MIxS Extension)

- `env_broad_scale` will
  exclude [aquatic biome [ENVO:00002030]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00002030)
- `env_local_scale` ????? TBC

> - `env_medium`
>       example [hydrocarbon-based environmental material [ENVO:2000045]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_2000045?lang=en)
>     - Textual filtering over labels, with or without regular expressions or stemming, _could_ also be used
>         - food, water and ice terms could be removed without stemming
>         - stemming with the pattern 'ferment' could be used to remove terms with fermented or fermenting in their labels

Author: ```suggestion
- `env_medium` TBC
```

metadata systems, such as NCBI, GOLD, and NMDC. Some of those sources, especially NCBI, are very permissive for the
environmental triad values. Because the candidate value tables include multiple empirical sources plus the results of
the general, rules-based OAK queries, no one source can introduce inappropriate values nor exclude reasonable values.
Initial exploration suggests that the queries will be hard limits for `env_broad_scale` and `env_medium`, but that the
empirical evidence will be more important for `env_local_scale`. General, rules-based queries will be refined for each
of the environments (MIxS Extensions), and will be reflected in either query-specific columns or general boolean
columns, like 'is_biome' or 'is_environmental_material'.

- This ADR will be updated as environment-specific queries are created.
- The logic described above is intended to minimize cherry-picking of values for the sets.
- Any filtering should be accomplished as a general query. For example, we will not remove a specific term, but rather identify a rule that accounts for more general needs.

> - Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over inconsistent annotations, or grouping of values within a semantic embedding space.

Author: ```suggestion
- Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which might require complex OAK queries. over inconsistent annotations, or grouping of values within a semantic embedding space.
```

In that case, the `env_broad_scale` values sets for individual environments/sample types must be subsets of the general
query.

The empirical evidence is based on values that have been used for the environmental triad slots in prominent Biosample
metadata systems, such as NCBI, GOLD, and NMDC. Some of those sources, especially NCBI, are very permissive for the
environmental triad values. Because the candidate value tables include multiple empirical sources plus the results of
the general, rules-based OAK queries, no one source can introduce inappropriate values nor exclude reasonable values.
Initial exploration suggests that the queries will be hard limits for `env_broad_scale` and `env_medium`, but that the
empirical evidence will be more important for `env_local_scale`. General, rules-based queries will be refined for each
of the environments (MIxS Extensions), and will be reflected in either query-specific columns or general boolean
columns, like 'is_biome' or 'is_environmental_material'.

- This ADR will be updated as environment-specific queries are created.

> - The logic described above is intended to minimize cherry-picking of values for the sets.

Author: ```suggestion
- The logic described above is intended to minimize cherry-picking of values for the sets.
- Any filtering should be accomplished as a general query. For example, we will not remove a specific term, but rather identify a rule that accounts for more general needs.
```

- The logic described above is intended to minimize cherry-picking of values for the sets.
- Any filtering should be accomplished as a general query. For example, we will not remove a specific term, but rather identify a rule that accounts for more general needs.

> - Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over inconsistent annotations, or grouping of values within a semantic embedding space. For example, there may be evidence that [farm [ENVO:00000078]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00000078),
>   [agricultural field [ENVO:00000114]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00000114)
>   and [banana plantation [ENVO:00000161]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00000161)

Author: ```suggestion
- Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over inconsistent annotations, or grouping of values within a semantic embedding space.
```

grouping similar Biosamples.

NMDC will establish reproducible logic to provide users with value sets, i.e. curated lists of reasonable terms, for
each slot. The value sets will be implemented as enumerations in the submission-schema, and will be composed in the MIxS
style: the label for a class from a high quality ontology, followed by the class' CURIe, inside of square brackets. For
example, one reasonable `env_broad_scale` for a Soil sample _might_ be 'temperate grassland biome [ENVO:01000193]'

These value sets are not necessarily intended to be closed indefinitely. An environmental triad slot could be given an
enumeration, or a regular expression pattern as constraints. This could be a temporary allowance while NMDC's logic is
being refined. Values that match the regular expression but do not come from the enumeration will need to be reviewed on
a regular basis, as submitters could provide values that have typos, that have CURIe/label mismatches, or just are not
reasonable values for the slot.

*This ADR is in progress. The initial plan has been outlined here and may change.*

> ## Decision Outcome

Author: ```suggestion

## Decision Outcome
```

grouping similar Biosamples.

NMDC will establish reproducible logic to provide users with value sets, i.e. curated lists of reasonable terms, for
each slot. The value sets will be implemented as enumerations in the submission-schema, and will be composed in the MIxS
style: the label for a class from a high quality ontology, followed by the class' CURIe, inside of square brackets. For
example, one reasonable `env_broad_scale` for a Soil sample _might_ be 'temperate grassland biome [ENVO:01000193]'

These value sets are not necessarily intended to be closed indefinitely. An environmental triad slot could be given an
enumeration, or a regular expression pattern as constraints. This could be a temporary allowance while NMDC's logic is
being refined. Values that match the regular expression but do not come from the enumeration will need to be reviewed on
a regular basis, as submitters could provide values that have typos, that have CURIe/label mismatches, or just are not
reasonable values for the slot.

*This ADR is in progress. The initial plan has been outlined here and may change.*

## Decision Outcome

> NMDC environment-specific value sets for the environmental triad slots will be generated by processes that emphasize

Author: ```suggestion
NMDC environment-specific value sets for the environmental triad slots will be generated by a processes that emphasize
```

> NMDC environment-specific value sets for the environmental triad slots will be generated by a processes that emphasize

Author: ```suggestion
NMDC environment-specific value sets for the environmental triad slots will be generated by processes that emphasize
```

metadata systems, such as NCBI, GOLD, and NMDC. Some of those sources, especially NCBI, are very permissive for the
environmental triad values. Because the candidate value tables include multiple empirical sources plus the results of
the general, rules-based OAK queries, no one source can introduce inappropriate values nor exclude reasonable values.
Initial exploration suggests that the queries will be hard limits for `env_broad_scale` and `env_medium`, but that the
empirical evidence will be more important for `env_local_scale`. General, rules-based queries will be refined for each
of the environments (MIxS Extensions), and will be reflected in either query-specific columns or general boolean
columns, like 'is_biome' or 'is_environmental_material'.

- This ADR will be updated as environment-specific queries are created.
- The logic described above is intended to minimize cherry-picking of values for the sets.
- Any filtering should be accomplished as a general query. For example, we will not remove a specific term, but rather identify a rule that accounts for more general needs.

>   Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over

Author: ```suggestion
- Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over
```

> - Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over
>   inconsistent annotations, or grouping of values within a semantic embedding space. For example, there may be evidence
>   that [farm [ENVO:00000078]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00000078),

Author: ```suggestion
- Expert review will be done on an initial list of accepted terms. Insights from review will be fed back into reusable logic, which that might require complex OAK queries. over inconsistent annotations, or grouping of values within a semantic embedding space. For example, there may be evidence that [farm [ENVO:00000078]](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/envo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FENVO_00000078),
```

---
status: proposed / in progress
date: 2024-08-28
deciders: Montana Smith, Mark Miller, Sierra Moxen
consulted: Lee Ann McCue, Natalie Winans
informed: 
---
# Establishing valid terms for MIxS Environmental Triad 

## Context and Problem Statement

> Determining what to assert for each of the environmental triad slot (`env_broad_scale`, `env_local_scale`, and `env_medium`) is difficult.

Reviewer: Fix typo: slot → slots

```suggestion
Determining what to assert for each of the environmental triad slots (i.e., `env_broad_scale`, `env_local_scale`, and `env_medium`) is difficult.
```

Author: fixed in Mark's PR

> NMDC will provide a reporducible logic to provide users with a curated lists of valid terms for each slot.

Reviewer: Fix typos

```suggestion
NMDC will implement reproducible logic to provide users with curated lists of valid terms for each slot.
```

I don't know what the author means by "logic" in this context (e.g. an algorithm, an implementation of that algorithm in code).

> These terms will not be limiting, a user can still use string match to enter terms. This is a temporart allowance until user research and refinment of these queries is completed.

Reviewer 2: typo in temporary

Author: resolved in Mark's PR

> These terms will not be limiting, a user can still use string match to enter terms. This is a temporart allowance until user research and refinment of these queries is completed.

Reviewer: The original had two independent clauses separated by a comma. I changed it to a period.

This suggestion incorporates @aclum's feedback also.

```suggestion
These terms will not be limiting. A user can still use string match to enter terms. This is a temporary allowance until user research and refinment of these queries is completed.
```

I don't know what the author meant by "string match" (e.g. entry of freeform strings)?

> Any term provided by a user that does **not** come from the provided list will be evaluated.

Reviewer: Questions I have when reading this:
- evaluted by whom (e.g. the people listed on this ADR)?

Author: added https://github.com/microbiomedata/issues/pull/881/files#r1765318762

> *This ADR is in progress. Initialy plan has been outlined here & may change*

Reviewer: Fix typo and phrasing (since the ADR is an object instead of an action, I changed "in progress" to "under construction").

```suggestion
*This ADR is under construction. An initial plan has been outlined here and may change.*
```

## Decision Outcome

> To provide a reusable method of establishing valid terms, NMDC will provide rules for "general" allowed terms. Meaning the ontology terms that are identified using the "NMDC General Query" could be applied to **any** environmental sample type (MIxS Extensions).

Reviewer: The second sentence was an incomplete sentence, so I joined it with the first sentence (with semicolon).

```suggestion
To provide a reusable method of establishing valid terms, NMDC will provide rules for "general" allowed terms; meaning the ontology terms that are identified using the "NMDC General Query" could be applied to **any** environmental sample type (MIxS Extensions).
```

To ensure interoperability and consistancy, the NMDC General Query will be ammended for each environmental sample type.
- To satisfy NMDC needs, we will start here with soil.
- This ADR will be updated as environment specific queries are created.

> - No environment specific query should be "cherry picked". Rather any filtering should be accomplished as a general query. (Example, will not remove a specific term by ID, but rather identify what is the rule that can be created to fit a overall need.)

Reviewer: I'm not too familiar with the subject matter of this ADR (just reviewing it because I was tagged). I found this bullet point confusing and have tried to clarify it here, although I may have deviated from the author's original intention.

```suggestion
- No environment specific query should be "cherry picked"; rather, any filtering should be accomplished as a general query. For example, we will not remove a specific term, but rather identify a rule that accounts for more general needs.
```

NMDC General Query

> - `env_broad_scale` will be composed of terms that branch from biome [ENVO:00000428]

Reviewer: Formatting

```suggestion
- `env_broad_scale` will be composed of terms that branch from biome `ENVO:00000428`
```

>   - We will then evaluate what is lost when ecosystem is excluded and determine what needs “re-added” or requested of envo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - We will then evaluate what is lost when the ecosystem is excluded and determine what needs to be either re-added or requested from ENVO
```
